SPEED READING

The average speed of reading is 240 words per minute (wpm). However, you can increase your reading speed by using some of these simple techniques.

Reading involves seeing and recognising symbolic information, and the comprehension and processing of that information. The following stages involve storage, recall and communication of the information read.

The main causes of slow reading are at the comprehension stage. Put simply, people don’t pay attention. Your eyes don’t move over text smoothly, but in a series of stops and jumps, pausing for a fraction of a second on words and phrases. These pauses are called fixations. If you re-read sections, words or phrases as a matter of course, then you will be a much slower reader than
you should be. It is not necessary to focus on individual words, as we can gain meaning from groups of words. Fast readers focus on groups of words and take in as many as six words per fixation.1

More often than not, just making a conscious effort to   improve   your   reading   style   will   automatically make you faster.2

Actually, speeding up your reading can be more natural than slow reading. It requires less effort both physically, in terms of eye movement, and mentally, as you are less likely to become bored and lose concentration. Our brains are more stimulated and therefore more focused when information is unique.3
Fast readers gain more impetus as they read, take in more information, and therefore focus attention better.

There are some simple techniques you can use to focus your attention. Practising these techniques will: reduce the time of each fixation; expand fixation to include more words; and reduce back-skipping by increasing comprehension.

Increasing comprehension

There is no point in reading quickly if you do not understand what you are reading. Understanding the text can increase your reading speed by eliminating back-skipping. At the same time, increasing your reading speed can increase understanding as you are less likely to become bored and lose the train of meaning. Here are some tips to help you improve comprehension:
4

1  Tony Buzan, Use Your Head (BBC Worldwide Limited, 2000).
2  Tony Buzan, p 50.
3  Eric Jensen, The Learning Brain (The Brain Store, 1995).
4  http://english.glendale.cc.ca.us.
Ref: http://member.goodpractice.net/Leadership-Foundation-
KB/Welcome.gp
	Vary your reading style. Different types of text will require different reading techniques, so you will need to know what you want from a piece of text before you read it. If your aim is to gain a general understanding, then you should skim read. However, if you need a detailed view, then you should read slowly enough for a full
understanding.5  Difficult to understand text, such as journal articles, will also require a slower reading than easier text, such as magazines.

	Preview the text. You can improve comprehension by taking a few seconds before reading the piece to look over it. Take in headings and subheadings, look at pictures and diagrams, and read the first sentences of paragraphs.

	Take breaks. When your momentum starts to slow, take a couple of seconds to look away from the text and focus your eyes on something else. You may prefer to close your eyes for a few seconds.

	Test yourself. Stop periodically to recall what you have just read. This will allow you to see if you understand what you are reading, while also aiding the storage of information in your brain.

Visual aids

Visual aids can help focus your eye on the text. Changing the movement to go faster than you think you can read will train you to speed up your reading.6

	Pointing. When children learn to read, they often move their finger along the text as they read. This is actually good reading practice, as the eye is drawn to motion and it gives a smooth rhythmical habit. Moving your hand, or pen, under the line you are reading in a smooth motion can aid your reading. You can also train yourself to increase your speed by moving your hand faster.

	Down strokes. Placing your hand on the page you are reading and slowly and evenly moving it down (once per page) will help draw your eyes down as you read. Your eyes don’t have to follow your hand exactly, but the motion will help you to go faster.

	Hiding text. To help break the habit of back-skipping, use a piece of paper to cover the line of text above the line you are reading. Draw the paper slowly down the page.

	Hop. To help you increase the number of words per fixation, use your hand or pen to make two even bounces under each line of text. This will focus your eyes on a group of words (three to five) and also help you maintain a steady reading rhythm.

5  ‘Speed Reading - Radically Increasing Your Reading Speed’ at:
www.mindtools.com.
6  Dennis Doyle ‘Self-Reading Self Pacing Methods’ at:
http://english.glendale.cc.ca.us/methods.html.
Skim reading and expanding your focus

If you want a very general understanding of a piece of text, for example if you are looking to find out whether an article is relevant for your needs, then it is a good idea to read headings, subheadings and the first and last sentences of paragraphs. Abstracts and conclusions are also very useful for this purpose.

Speed reading involves taking in more than one word at a time. However, it is even possible to take in the general meaning of more than one sentence at a time. This is very useful for getting an overview and also for improving general reading speeds. The idea is not to read every word, but to allow your mind to extract the main themes and ideas.

There are techniques you can use to help you to scan and expand your focus. With your hand or a pen, practise different patterns of movement across the page to direct your eye movement. You could try diagonal strokes, curving, or straight down. You could also try zigzagging, where you cut across about
three lines of the text diagonally, then slide back to the start of the following line.

Increasing pace

There are a number of ways in which you can increase your pace of reading, such as the ‘hop’ technique described earlier. You could also use a metronome as an aid. Set a reasonable pace, with each beat indicating a sweep of a visual aid. This will give you a steady and smooth rhythm, and will
allow you to avoid slowing down. By increasing the speed a little at a time, you can train yourself to read faster.

You can also make a conscious effort to stop enunciating words as you read them, either out loud or in your head. Average speaking time is 250 wpm, which is much slower than you should be able to read.

Test your reading speed

You can test your own reading speed by reading for one minute and counting the number of words read. It is important that the text is not too complex or simple, and that you gain a good understanding of the text. Alternatively, there are some online reading tests available.7


7  One reading test ‘Speed Reading Test Online’ is available at:
www.readingsoft.com.
